Through faith, they defeated kingdoms, brought about righteousness.
Obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the force of fire,
escaped the edge of the sword.
From a weak state were made powerful, became mighty in war, routed invading armies.
Faith in Jehovah has allowed ordinary people to do extraordinary things.
This kind of faith is still active today and still has the power to help us through any difficulty.
So let's travel across the globe and see how deep reliance on Jehovah has helped many overcome their unique trials.
As we visit each land, we'll enjoy a story of faith shared both from the perspective of close friends as well as the individuals involved.
Now to our first destination.
South Africa is full of contrasts and diversity.
Big modern cities mix with poorer remote areas.
For many volunteers in Kingdom Hall construction, this presents wonderful opportunities,
but also unique challenges that require faith in Jehovah.
An example of that is our young friend, Nathla.
My wife and I really appreciated the faith she showed to make herself available and to keep her joy in her assignment.
I'm the only Jehovah's Witness in my family.
What my mother desired the most for me was to grow up, go to college, and in time, get a high-paying job.
My congregation was busy building a Kingdom Hall.
So I would sometimes also go to help.
I wanted to see and feel the joy that those brothers were having building Kingdom Halls.
My mom didn't like it when she heard that I was going to help with Kingdom Hall construction.
She felt that I was wasting my time.
When I arrived on site, everything I did was for the first time.
I didn't have skills and I had never done this work before.
It is not easy.
Sometimes I get tired, mentally exhausted, and even physically exhausted.
Sometimes it's difficult to even read the Bible.
I just want to wash up and go to sleep.
It was important for Nathla to find her spiritual balance because her spirituality was more important than working hard on site.
I realized that I needed to be really determined because my spirituality was not the same as before.
I saw that I needed to make a change.
I made it a priority to read the Bible first and to think about the things I read.
I also made sure that I was regular in going out in the ministry.
Prayer helped a lot because prayer is the best way for me to tell Jehovah things that concern me.
I have seen from myself how Jehovah God has sustained me.
We've seen that she is much more balanced.
My mom would phone and ask, Nathla, how is the project going?
And then she would say, if this makes you happy, then I am also happy.
At first, I had my fears, but faith made me confident that Jehovah God would always be there to support me in everything I do.
Canada is a diverse country, both the landscape and because of immigration, the people and their languages.
In order to share Bible truth with these ones, many brothers are learning a new language, like my friend Shaquille.
When Shaquille got invited to Bethel, I had the privilege of serving at Canada branch at the time.
So it was such a pleasure to see this young man who had all these wonderful goals and to see one by one Jehovah opening those doors to him.
He had made a promise to Jehovah as a young person.
I want to help those that don't have anyone to help them.
Jehovah saw good in me and he invested in me and he was very patient with me and I saw it through every brother and sister who sincerely reached out to help me.
I'm meditating on Jehovah's qualities and you want to imitate him. You want to show the kindness that he's shown towards you towards others.
So in foreign language, I feel like there's a giant opportunity to do that.
I started to learn Punjabi and I never regretted it, changed my service to Jehovah.
There was a time period in my Bethel service when I was really, really sick.
And it was a kind of sickness where I didn't know why it was happening.
No doctor could tell me why it was happening. It affected my physical appearance and it seemed like torment throughout each and every day.
A lot of times I would have rather not have been seen.
So serving in foreign language now when you're one of the people who spiritually supposed to be strengthening others, but you're going through a hard time yourself, that was a massive challenge for me.
I think all of his friends just really appreciated the faith that he had to overcome that.
And even though it was a very low point in his life, he really hung on to Jehovah.
If I'm in this assignment and I've seen that Jehovah's bless me, what would lead me to conclude that he's going to stop?
He couldn't sleep, he just couldn't continue at Bethel either.
I had left Bethel, but still my health was decreasing and it was getting really bad.
And it was getting to the point that doctors expressed concern about maybe an organ failing and things like that.
But they did not give me any way out. I had no way out.
He kept making progress even though there was certainly some really difficult times for him.
I had to take a realistic approach towards my new situation.
And I had to figure out, okay, how am I going to put Kingdom Interest first while materially taking care of myself?
And hopefully figuring out why I'm sick and if I can do anything about it.
In the end, he decided to stick with foreign language.
And something I really learned from Shaquille is that he really took the scriptures and made it personal.
He would read it as if he was the person in the scriptures and he would meditate on it.
And now he could see how, even though he didn't know the answers, Jehovah would help him through his difficult times.
So what am I going to do? I'm going to live up to what I promised Jehovah.
Today, he serves with his wife in the Punjabi field.
He's a loving shepherd, then he even instructs Punjabi language classes.
In Indonesia, people work very hard. They seek stability through a secure job.
This can have a powerful influence on the brothers and sisters because they may feel that they can't expand their ministry.
When I met the Japanese girls, they were working toward Pioneer Service.
When they started, I asked them, would you like to be used more fully by Jehovah?
I was confused.
We felt that the Pioneer Service itself was already a big accomplishment.
I encouraged them to think about the school for Kingdom Evangelizers.
I had never imagined applying for SKE. It was tempting.
I wanted to be used by Jehovah, but what would happen to us after graduation?
Where would we be assigned? What would be our assignment?
We needed more faith, so we prayed a lot about that.
Jehovah answered my prayers through the brothers and sisters in the congregation.
Marta had a prestigious job.
She was even being offered many scholarships so that she could pursue higher education and further advance her career.
The brothers and sisters never criticized Marta's work choice.
Rather, they showed us the joys of serving Jehovah more fully.
When I was still deciding what to do, some of them asked me about my spiritual goals
and what I could see myself doing, thinking about such questions, convinced me to choose SKE.
They were invited to attend this school.
They had to leave their jobs, their house, and the comforts of the place and city where they lived.
They were assigned to a small congregation.
They had to pray even more to ask Jehovah God for guidance and direction.
Now they're serving in the traveling work, caring for a circuit.
We are fully convinced that it was not due to any greatness on our part, but because of Jehovah's help.
If we want to be used by Jehovah and if we want to serve him, Jehovah can use us in many different ways.
VG is a beautiful place.
However, one thing that is common here is poverty.
That is the situation Sister Baccata faces.
My husband was a hard worker.
While we were out in the water, he cried out from the mangroves.
When I went and found him, I knew that it was a stroke.
I had to take on both roles as husband and wife.
I would farm.
I would fish.
It was a difficult life.
One day, a sister was sick.
Even though Sister Baccata faced challenges.
If there was any washing or cleaning needed for the sick sister,
she was happy to go and help with that too.
I think back to when a cyclone hit Kadavu, cyclone Kenny.
I was scared by the damage it did to our house.
Our outdoor kitchen was blown off.
When I heard about the things that happened to the brothers, I felt so sorry for them.
Their roofs were blown away and the walls had fallen down.
Just think about what Sister Baccata did.
She had twenty Fiji and dollars.
That is the only money she had.
But she decided to give all of that to the brothers.
I didn't have any other way to help them.
Jehovah is the God of love.
Like it says at first on four and eight, his main quality is love.
Because of that love, I gave the money from the bottom of my heart.
I learned that even though we are poor, we can still be generous to assist our brothers.
The more I gave, the more Jehovah gave back to me.
Till today, we've always had what we've needed.
And through, like many places around the world,
our brothers and sisters need to work hard.
Benjamin and Doris have to make good use of their resources in order to provide for their family.
We want to give our children a spiritual heritage.
We want them to be able to serve Jehovah by watching how we are doing it.
We watch a lot of videos that help us.
We often remember the video about Abilio Anula.
They also had three children.
They moved to another place and grew up in a very nice spiritual atmosphere.
They are serving Jehovah now as adults.
So we asked ourselves, could we move to another place where the need is great?
It takes faith to go to an unfamiliar place.
One video on JW.org that helped us a lot was about the family from England that moved to Ecuador.
First, they went for one month.
So we said that we should also go visit first.
Going to another country would have been exciting.
It would have been super.
But our economic situation wouldn't allow us to go that far.
We took a trip together with our children to visit a territory that had a need, called Kalango.
It takes about an hour and a half to get there.
They liked the geography of the area, in all the vegetation.
There were many things that captured their attention.
The things that I like in Kalango are playing and preaching.
We were unable to move to the city of Kalango because of the economic situation that the people face there.
It's hard to get a job there.
So for that reason, we decided to travel to Kalango Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
And work the other days here in Pachakamak.
We have felt that Jehovah is helping us because he has made it possible to work here.
And the money that we earn in those days allows us to be with our brothers there.
We needed to know how to keep things simple.
We learned that from the videos on JW.org.
The hard work that they do proves to me that they really love Jehovah.
They fully trust that Jehovah is our father.
He is the dad and we know that dad always comes through for his children.
And that faith is something that greatly motivates them.
The videos on JW.org have given us the push that we needed.
We needed those videos in order to take action and move to another area.
Across Russia, our brothers have successfully faced decades of persecution and ban.
The budden chucks, like so many families there, still face these challenges today.
On June 12, 2018 at 5.30am, armed men burst into our home.
They threw my husband to the floor and handcuffed him.
Eventually, they sent my husband to a pretrial detention facility for 11 months.
It was frightening just imagining certain things.
She didn't find it easy and shed many tears.
I was really worried about how I would care for the children
and how I would fulfill their needs spiritually, emotionally and physically.
Prayer calmed me down because I wanted, of course, to react very emotionally to everything
to the injustice that we were facing.
When the court hearings were going on, brothers and sisters would come.
It was such a support, so strengthening.
On September 19, 2019, the court convicted my husband
and sent him to a prison colony for three and a half years.
In January 2020, a new disaster hit us.
At 1am, our house burned to the ground.
We stood there near the house, and my son Igor suggested saying a prayer.
I don't remember the prayer, but afterwards I felt calmer.
Then cars started coming to the house.
It was our brothers and sisters.
I was frozen, shaking from the cold.
They dressed me like a small child.
They brought us hot tea, food, everything of the highest quality.
Just one month after the fire, when they took my husband to the prison colony,
officers there beat him up.
When I found out about it, it was so hard for me.
Because I didn't know how to help my husband or how he was feeling.
Tanya copes with hardships very courageously.
I prayed to Jehovah sometimes all night.
It felt as though Jehovah gave me painkillers to dull my pain.
My husband, Alexi, tries to take care of us.
In the pre-trial detention facility, for example,
each day he wrote letters of encouragement to us, which we read together as a family.
My dear family, remember the qualities that we need right now,
endurance, courage, calmness, and most importantly, faith.
I like the thought that after winter, summer always comes.
After the night, the day arrives, and after the darkest days,
there will definitely come a sunny one.
Throughout all these trials, having a good spiritual schedule and reading the Bible has given me strength.
Also, we prepare for meetings and participate in the ministry.
I was really afraid to do it.
But this situation has helped me to see Jehovah's support.
I have realized that even in my circumstances, I can still help others.
We know that Jehovah has already given us his support,
and we believe that he will continue to support us.
Their example of courage instead fast faith in the face of difficulties and trials
proves that we can also remain faithful.
We too can make Jehovah happy and continue to serve him without becoming discouraged.
We have learned to trust more in Jehovah and not to panic when a difficult situation arises.
His difficulties have made me stronger, helped me to overcome many of the fears I used to have,
and strengthened my faith and my desire to help others.
As we have seen, our brothers, the world, over continue to show strong faith.
How did they do it? A regular study of God's Word, time spent in deep meditation,
and seeking His direction in prayer.
What did this allow them to accomplish?
Through faith, our brothers handled theocratic building assignments,
learned foreign languages, attended theocratic schools.
Though poor, remained generous, served where the need was great,
and preached despite persecution.
And Jehovah knows we can do the same.
Yes, if we let faith move us to action, those actions will strengthen our faith.